# Developer Architecture Overview

This shall give a sufficiently good overview over the haskell.nix
ideas, such that a new developer can navigate around without too
much trouble.

## Packages

`haskell.nix` is centered around packages (haskell package
descriptions as nix-expressions). These are generated by
`cabal-to-nix` from the `nix-tools` package. `stack-to-nix` and
`plan-to-nix` will delegate the transformation of cabal packages to
nix expressions to the same code that `cabal-to-nix` uses.

These packages will look similar to the following:

```nix
{ system, compiler, flags, pkgs, hsPkgs, pkgconfPkgs, ... }:
{
  flags = {};
  package = { ... };
  components = {
    "library" = { depends = [ ... ]; };
    exes = { "..." = { depends = [ ... ]; }; ... };
    sublibs = { "..." = { depends = [ ... ]; }; ... };
    tests = { "..." = { depends = [ ... ]; }; ... };
    benchmarks = { "..." = { depends = [ ... ]; }; ... };
  };
};
```

The exact specification can be found in `modules/package.nix`.

## Plans

Packages (unless specified directly in the `packages` attribute of the
module) usually come from a plan. A plan is either a Stackage snapshot
(nightly or LTS) or a build plan as produced by `cabal`.

Plan files usually look like the following:
```nix
hackage:
{
  packages = {
    "$pkg".revision = hackage.$pkg.$version.revisions.default;
    "$pkg".flags = { flag1 = true; flag2 = false; ... };
	...
  };
  compiler = {
    version = "8.4.4";
      nix-name = "ghc844";
      packages = {
        "binary" = "0.8.5.1";
	...
      };
   };
}
```

This provides enough information about the compiler, what packages the
compiler ships with and the packages we want to use in our plan.

This revision and flag information will be inlined into a list of
packages in `config.packages` in `modules/plan.nix`.  Thus
`config.packages` will only contains packages as described in the
previous section.

## Package Sets (of derivations)

We finally tie this all together in `package-set.nix` where we use
`modules/component-driver.nix` to produce the derivations for each
packages component to produce the final `config.hsPkgs` value.

There is also a `modules/compat-driver.nix` that should produce the
same packageset to be used with the stock haskell infrastructure in
nixpkgs (*This has undergone substantially less testing*).

### Component builder

To prevent depending on mutliple instances of the same libraries, the
component builder will try to build every package from scratch and
rely as little as possible on packages that are shipped with the GHC
distribution. The exceptions are packages that are known to not be
reinstallable. See `config.nonReinstallablePkgs`.

The component builder can be found in `modules/component-driver.nix`
and `builder/default.nix`. The component-driver will ensure that we do
not try to rebuild non-reinstallable packages, and call the
`builder/default.nix` on each package in `config.packages` to produce
`config.hsPkgs`.
